Bitcoin - Wikipedia Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Contribute Languages Language links are at the top of the page across from the title. Personal tools Pages for logged out editors Contents move to sidebar hide Toggle Design subsection Toggle Wallets subsection Toggle History subsection Toggle Associated ideologies subsection Toggle Economics subsection Toggle Legal status, tax and regulation subsection Toggle Economic and legal concerns subsection Toggle In popular culture subsection Toggle the table of contents Toggle the table of contents Bitcoin 117 languages English Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions General Print/export In other projects From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Decentralized digital currency "₿" redirects here. Not to be confused with "฿" for . Bitcoin Official logo of Bitcoin Denominations Plural Bitcoins (Unicode: U+20BF ₿ BITCOIN SIGN ) Code BTC, XBT Precision 10 −8 Subunits 1 ⁄ 1000 Millibitcoin 1 ⁄ 1 000 000 Microbitcoin 1 ⁄ 100 000 000 Satoshi Development Original author(s) Implementation(s) Initial release 0.1.0 / 9 January 2009 (14 years ago) ( 2009-01-09 ) 24.0.1 / 12 December 2022 (4 months ago) ( 2022-12-12 ) Development status Active Source model Ledger Ledger start 3 January 2009 (14 years ago) ( 2009-01-03 ) (partial hash inversion) (two rounds) Issuance schedule Decentralized (block reward) Initially ₿50 per block, halved every 210,000 blocks Block reward ₿6.25 Block time 10 minutes Circulating supply ₿18,925,000 Supply limit ₿21,000,000 Valuation Floating Demographics Official user(s) El Salvador Central African Republic Website Website Encoded version 10.0 (2017) in Very early software versions used the code "BC". Compatible with ISO 4217. May 2020 to approximately 2024, halved approximately every four years As of 2022-01-10 The supply will approach, but never reach, ₿21 million. Issuance will permanently halt c. 2140 at ₿20,999,999.9769. : ch. 8 Without proper , you may see . ( : or ; : ) is a which implements a , public, permanent, and decentralized . In order to add to the ledger, a user must prove they control an entry in the ledger. The protocol specifies that the entry indicates an amount of a token, with a minuscule b. The user can update the ledger, assigning some of their bitcoin to another entry in the ledger. Because the token has characteristics of money, it can be thought of as a . Bitcoin transactions are verified by network through and recorded in a public called a . The was invented in 2008 by an unknown person or group of people using the name . The currency began use in 2009, when its implementation was released as . : ch. 1 The word "bitcoin" was defined in a published on October 31, 2008. It is a of the words and . The Library of Congress reports that, as of November 2021, nine countries have fully banned bitcoin use, and a further forty-two have implicitly banned it. A few governments have used bitcoin in some capacity. as legal tender, although use by merchants remains low. has accepted cryptocurrency donations to fund the resistance to the . has used bitcoin to bypass . Bitcoin has been described as an by at least eight recipients of the . The are substantial. Its algorithm for is designed to be computationally difficult, which requires the consumption of increasing quantities of electricity, the generation of which has contributed to . According to the , bitcoin has emitted an estimated 200 million tonnes of carbon dioxide since its launch, or about 0.04% of all carbon dioxide released since 2009. Design Units and divisibility The of the bitcoin system is the bitcoin . for representing bitcoin are BTC and XBT. : 2 Its character is ₿. One bitcoin is divisible to eight decimal places. : ch. 5 Units for smaller amounts of bitcoin are the millibitcoin (mBTC), equal to 1 ⁄ 1000 bitcoin, and the satoshi (sat), which is the smallest possible division, and named in homage to bitcoin's creator, representing 1 ⁄ 100 000 000 (one hundred millionth) bitcoin. 100,000 satoshis are one mBTC. Blockchain Data structure of blocks in the ledger The bitcoin is a public that records bitcoin transactions. It is implemented as a chain of blocks , each block containing a of the previous block up to the genesis block in the chain. A of communicating nodes running bitcoin software maintains the blockchain. : 215–219 Transactions of the form payer X sends Y bitcoins to payee Z are to this network using readily available software applications. Network nodes can validate transactions, add them to their copy of the ledger, and then broadcast these ledger additions to other nodes. To achieve independent verification of the chain of ownership, each network node stores its own copy of the blockchain. At varying intervals of time averaging to every 10 minutes, a new group of accepted transactions, called a block, is created, added to the blockchain, and quickly published to all nodes, without requiring central oversight. This allows bitcoin software to determine when a particular bitcoin was spent, which is needed to prevent . A conventional ledger records the transfers of actual or that exist apart from it, but as a digital ledger, bitcoins only exist by virtue of the blockchain; they are represented by the . : ch. 5 Individual blocks, public addresses, and transactions within blocks can be examined using a blockchain explorer. Transactions See also: Transactions are defined using a -like scripting language. : ch. 5 Transactions consist of one or more inputs and one or more outputs . When a user sends bitcoins, the user designates each address and the amount of bitcoin being sent to that address in an output. To prevent double spending, each input must refer to a previous unspent output in the blockchain. The use of multiple inputs corresponds to the use of multiple coins in a cash transaction. Since transactions can have multiple outputs, users can send bitcoins to multiple recipients in one transaction. As in a cash transaction, the sum of inputs (coins used to pay) can exceed the intended sum of payments. In such a case, an additional output is used, returning the change back to the payer. Any input satoshis not accounted for in the transaction outputs become the transaction fee. Though transaction fees are optional, miners can choose which transactions to process and prioritize those that pay higher fees. Miners may choose transactions based on the fee paid relative to their storage size, not the absolute amount of money paid as a fee. These fees are generally measured in satoshis per byte (sat/b) . The size of transactions is dependent on the number of inputs used to create the transaction and the number of outputs. : ch. 8 The blocks in the blockchain were originally limited to 32 in size. The block size limit of one megabyte was introduced by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2010. [ ] Eventually, the block size limit of one megabyte created for transaction processing, such as increasing transaction fees and delayed processing of transactions. has stated is a potential scaling solution and referred to lightning as a second-layer routing network. : ch. 8 Ownership Simplified chain of ownership as illustrated in the bitcoin whitepaper. In practice, a transaction can have more than one input and more than one output. In the blockchain, bitcoins are registered to bitcoin addresses. Creating a bitcoin address requires nothing more than picking a random valid private key and computing the corresponding bitcoin address. This computation can be done in a split second. But the reverse, computing the private key of a given bitcoin address, is practically unfeasible. : ch. 4 Users can tell others or make public a bitcoin address without compromising its corresponding private key. Moreover, the number of valid private keys is so vast that it is extremely unlikely someone will compute a key pair that is already in use and has funds. The vast number of valid private keys makes it unfeasible that brute force could be used to compromise a private key. To be able to spend their bitcoins, the owner must know the corresponding and the transaction. The network verifies the signature using the ; the private key is never revealed. : ch. 5 If the private key is lost, the will not recognize any other evidence of ownership; the coins are then unusable, and effectively lost. For example, in 2013 one user claimed to have lost ₿7,500, worth $7.5 million at the time, when he accidentally discarded a hard drive containing his private key. About 20% of all bitcoins are believed to be lost—they would have had a market value of about $20 billion at July 2018 prices. To ensure the security of bitcoins, the private key must be kept secret. : ch. 10 If the private key is revealed to a third party, e.g. through a , the third party can use it to . As of December 2017 , around ₿980,000 have been stolen from . Regarding ownership distribution, as of 28 December 2022, 9.62% of bitcoin addresses own 98.51% of all bitcoins ever mined. The largest of these addresses are thought to belong to exchanges, which are keeping their bitcoin in cold storage. Mining See also: Early bitcoin miners , as they were better suited to the algorithm than . Later amateurs mined bitcoins with specialized and chips. The chips pictured have become obsolete due to increasing difficulty. Today, bitcoin mining companies to housing and operating large amounts of high-performance mining hardware. of relative mining difficulty [ ] Mining is a record-keeping service done through the use of computer . Miners keep the blockchain consistent, complete, and unalterable by repeatedly grouping newly broadcast transactions into a block , which is then broadcast to the network and verified by recipient nodes. Each block contains a of the previous block, thus linking it to the previous block and giving the blockchain its name. : ch. 7 To be accepted by the rest of the network, a new block must contain a (PoW). The PoW requires miners to find a number called a (a number used just once), such that when the block content is along with the nonce, the result is numerically smaller than the network's difficulty target . : ch. 8 This PoW is easy for any node in the network to verify, but extremely time-consuming to generate. Miners must try many different nonce values (usually the sequence of tested values is the ascending natural numbers: 0, 1, 2, 3, ...) before a result happens to be less than the difficulty target. Because the difficulty target is extremely small compared to a typical SHA-256 hash, block hashes have many : ch. 8 as can be seen in this example block hash: 0000000000000000000590fc0f3eba193a278534220b2b37e9849e1a770ca959 By adjusting this difficulty target, the amount of work needed to generate a block can be changed. Every 2,016 blocks (approximately 14 days given roughly 10 minutes per block), nodes the difficulty target based on the recent rate of block generation, with the aim of keeping the average time between new blocks at ten minutes. In this way the system automatically adapts to the total amount of mining power on the network. : ch. 8 As of April 2022 , it takes on average 122 sextillion (122 thousand billion billion) attempts to generate a block hash smaller than the difficulty target. [ ] Computations of this magnitude are extremely expensive and utilize specialized hardware. The proof-of-work system, alongside the chaining of blocks, makes modifications to the blockchain extremely hard, as an attacker must modify all subsequent blocks in order for the modifications of one block to be accepted. As new blocks are being generated continuously, the difficulty of modifying an old block increases as time passes and the number of subsequent blocks (also called confirmations of the given block) increases. The vast majority of mining power is grouped together in to reduce variance in miner income. Independent miners may have to work for several years to mine a single block of transactions and receive payment. In a mining pool, all participating miners get paid every time any participant generates a block. This payment is proportionate to the amount of work an individual miner contributed to the pool. [ ] Supply Total bitcoins in circulation [ ] Every 10 minutes, the successful miner finding the new block is allowed by the rest of the network to collect for themselves all transaction fees from transactions they included in the block, as well as a predetermined reward of newly created bitcoins. As of 11 May 2020 , this reward is ₿6.25 in newly created bitcoins per block. To claim this reward, a special transaction called a coinbase is included in the block, with the miner as the payee. : ch. 8 All bitcoins in existence have been created through this type of transaction. The specifies that the reward for adding a block will be reduced by half every 210,000 blocks (approximately every four years), until ₿21 million are generated. The last new bitcoin will be generated around the year 2140. After that, a successful miner would be rewarded by transaction fees only. Decentralization Bitcoin is decentralized thus: Bitcoin does not have a central authority. The bitcoin network is peer-to-peer, without central servers. The network also has no central storage; the bitcoin ledger is distributed. The ledger is public; anybody can store it on a computer. : ch. 1 There is no single administrator; the ledger is maintained by a network of equally privileged miners. : ch. 1 Anyone can become a miner. : ch. 1 The additions to the ledger are maintained through competition. Until a new block is added to the ledger, it is not known which miner will create the block. : ch. 1 The issuance of bitcoins is decentralized. They are issued as a reward for the creation of a new block. Anybody can create a new bitcoin address (a bitcoin counterpart of a bank account) without needing any approval. : ch. 1 Anybody can send a transaction to the network without needing any approval; the network merely confirms that the transaction is legitimate. : 32 Conversely, researchers [ ] have pointed out a "trend towards centralization" [ ] . Although bitcoin can be sent directly from user to user, in practice intermediaries are widely used. : 220–222 Bitcoin miners join large mining pools to minimize the variance of their income. : 215, 219–222 : 3 Because transactions on the network are confirmed by miners, decentralization of the network requires that no single miner or mining pool obtains 51% of the hashing power, which would allow them to double-spend coins, prevent certain transactions from being verified and prevent other miners from earning income. As of 2013 just six mining pools controlled 75% of overall bitcoin hashing power. In 2014 mining pool obtained 51% hashing power which raised significant controversies about the safety of the network. The pool has voluntarily capped its hashing power at 39.99% and requested other pools to act responsibly for the benefit of the whole network. Around the year 2017, over 70% of the hashing power and 90% of transactions were operating from China. According to researchers, other parts of the ecosystem are also "controlled by a small set of entities", notably the maintenance of the client software, online wallets, and simplified payment verification (SPV) clients. Privacy and fungibility Bitcoin is , meaning that funds are not tied to real-world entities but rather bitcoin addresses. Owners of bitcoin addresses are not explicitly identified, but all transactions on the blockchain are public. In addition, transactions can be linked to individuals and companies through "idioms of use" (e.g., transactions that spend coins from multiple inputs indicate that the inputs may have a common owner) and corroborating public transaction data with known information on owners of certain addresses. Additionally, bitcoin exchanges, where bitcoins are traded for traditional currencies, may be required by law to collect personal information. To heighten financial privacy, a new bitcoin address can be generated for each transaction. While the Bitcoin network treats each bitcoin the same, thus establishing the basic level of , applications and individuals who use the network are free to break that principle. For instance, wallets and similar software technically handle all bitcoins equally, none is different from another. Still, the history of each bitcoin is registered and publicly available in the blockchain ledger, and that can allow users of to refuse to accept bitcoins coming from controversial transactions. For example, in 2012, Mt. Gox froze accounts of users who deposited bitcoins that were known to have just been stolen. Wallets For broader coverage of this topic, see . Bitcoin Core, a full client Electrum, a lightweight client A wallet stores the information necessary to transact bitcoins. While wallets are often described as a place to hold or store bitcoins, due to the nature of the system, bitcoins are inseparable from the blockchain transaction ledger. A wallet is more correctly defined as something that "stores the digital credentials for your bitcoin holdings" and allows one to access (and spend) them. : ch. 1, glossary Bitcoin uses , in which two cryptographic keys, one public and one private, are generated. At its most basic, a wallet is a collection of these keys. Software wallets The first wallet program, simply named Bitcoin , and sometimes referred to as the Satoshi client , was released in 2009 by Satoshi Nakamoto as . In version 0.5 the client moved from the user interface toolkit to , and the whole bundle was referred to as Bitcoin-Qt . After the release of version 0.9, the software bundle was renamed Bitcoin Core to distinguish itself from the underlying network. Bitcoin Core is, perhaps, the best known implementation or client. of Bitcoin Core exist, such as , , and Parity Bitcoin. There are several modes in which wallets can operate. They have an inverse relationship with regard to trustlessness and computational requirements. Full clients verify transactions directly by downloading a full copy of the blockchain (over 150 GB as of January 2018 ). [ ] They do not require trust in any external parties. Full clients check the validity of mined blocks, preventing them from transacting on a chain that breaks or alters network rules. : ch. 1 Because of its size and complexity, downloading and verifying the entire blockchain is not suitable for all computing devices. Lightweight clients consult full nodes to send and receive transactions without requiring a local copy of the entire blockchain (see – SPV ). This makes lightweight clients much faster to set up and allows them to be used on low-power, low-bandwidth devices such as smartphones. When using a lightweight wallet, however, the user must trust full nodes, as it can report faulty values back to the user. Lightweight clients follow the longest blockchain and do not ensure it is valid, requiring trust in full nodes. Third-party internet services called online wallets or webwallets offer similar functionality but may be easier to use. In this case, credentials to access funds are stored with the online wallet provider rather than on the user's hardware. As a result, the user must have complete trust in the online wallet provider. A malicious provider or a breach in server security may cause entrusted bitcoins to be stolen. An example of such a security breach occurred with Mt. Gox in 2011. Cold storage A paper wallet with a -like design. Both the private key and the address are visible in and as . A paper wallet with the address visible for adding or checking stored funds. The part of the page containing the private key is folded over and sealed. A brass with a private key hidden beneath a . A part of the address is visible through a transparent part of the hologram. A hardware wallet which processes bitcoin payments without exposing any credentials to the computer Wallet software is targeted by because of the lucrative potential for . A technique called "cold storage" keeps private keys out of reach of hackers; this is accomplished by keeping private keys offline at all times : ch. 4 by generating them on a device that is . : 39 The credentials necessary to spend bitcoins can be stored offline in a number of different ways, from specialized hardware wallets to simple paper printouts of the private key. : ch. 10 Hardware wallets A hardware wallet is a computer that signs transactions as requested by the user. These devices store private keys and carry out signing and encryption internally, and do not share any sensitive information with the host computer except already signed (and thus unalterable) transactions. Because hardware wallets never expose their private keys, even computers that may be compromised by malware do not have a vector to access or steal them. : 42–45 The user sets a passcode when setting up a hardware wallet. As hardware wallets are , : ch. 10 the passcode will be needed to extract any money. Paper wallets A paper wallet is created with a keypair generated on a ; the private key is written or printed onto the paper and then erased from the computer. : ch. 4 The paper wallet can then be stored in a safe physical location for later retrieval. : 39 Physical wallets can also take the form of metal with a private key accessible under a in a recess struck on the . : 38 The security hologram from the token, showing that the private key has been accessed. Originally, these tokens were struck in brass and other , but later used as bitcoin grew in value and popularity. : 80 Coins with stored face value as high as ₿1,000 have been struck in gold. : 102–104 The 's includes four specimens from the earliest series : 83 of funded bitcoin tokens; one is currently on display in the museum's money gallery. In 2013, a manufacturer of these tokens was ordered by the (FinCEN) to register as a before producing any more funded bitcoin tokens. : 80 History Main article: Creation External images Bitcoin logos made by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2009 (left) and 2010 (right) as . The domain name bitcoin.org was registered on 18 August 2008. On 31 October 2008, a link to a paper authored by titled Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System was posted to a cryptography mailing list. Nakamoto implemented the bitcoin software as and released it in January 2009. Nakamoto's identity remains unknown. No uniform convention for bitcoin capitalization exists; some sources use Bitcoin , capitalized, to refer to the technology and and bitcoin , lowercase, for the unit of account. , , and the advocate the use of lowercase bitcoin in all cases. On 3 January 2009, the bitcoin network was created when Nakamoto mined the starting block of the chain, known as the . Embedded in the of this block was the text "The Times 03/Jan/2009 Chancellor on brink of second bailout for banks". This note references a headline published by and has been interpreted as both a timestamp and a comment on the instability caused by . : 18 The receiver of the first bitcoin transaction was , who had created the first reusable system (RPoW) in 2004. Finney downloaded the bitcoin software on its release date, and on 12 January 2009 received ten bitcoins from Nakamoto. Other early cypherpunk supporters were creators of bitcoin predecessors: , creator of b-money, and , creator of . In 2010, the first known using bitcoin occurred when programmer Laszlo Hanyecz bought two pizzas for ₿10,000 from Jeremy Sturdivant. estimate that Nakamoto had mined about one million bitcoins before disappearing in 2010 when he handed the network alert key and control of the code repository over to . Andresen later became lead developer at the . Andresen then sought to decentralize control. This left opportunity for controversy to develop over the future development path of bitcoin, in contrast to the perceived authority of Nakamoto's contributions. 2011–2012 After early " " transactions, the first major users of bitcoin were , such as . During its 30 months of existence, beginning in February 2011, Silk Road exclusively accepted bitcoins as payment, transacting ₿9.9 million, worth about $214 million. : 222 In 2011, the price started at $0.30 per bitcoin, growing to $5.27 for the year. The price rose to $31.50 on 8 June. Within a month, the price fell to $11.00. The next month it fell to $7.80, and in another month to $4.77. In 2012, bitcoin prices started at $5.27, growing to $13.30 for the year. By 9 January the price had risen to $7.38, but then crashed by 49% to $3.80 over the next 16 days. The price then rose to $16.41 on 17 August, but fell by 57% to $7.10 over the next three days. The Bitcoin Foundation was founded in September 2012 to promote bitcoin's development and uptake. On 1 November 2011, the Bitcoin-Qt version 0.5.0 was released. It introduced a that used the . The software previously used for database management. Developers switched to in release 0.8 in order to reduce blockchain time. [ ] The update to this release resulted in a minor blockchain fork on 11 March 2013. The fork was resolved shortly afterwards. [ ] Seeding nodes through was discontinued in version 0.8.2. From version 0.9.0 the software was renamed to Bitcoin Core. Transaction fees were reduced again by a factor of ten as a means to encourage . [ ] Although Bitcoin Core does not use for the operation of the network, the software did use OpenSSL for remote procedure calls. Version 0.9.1 was released to remove the network's vulnerability to the . [ ] 2013–2016 In 2013, prices started at $13.30 rising to $770 by 1 January 2014. In March 2013 the temporarily split into two independent chains with different rules due to a bug in version 0.8 of the bitcoin software. The two blockchains operated simultaneously for six hours, each with its own version of the transaction history from the moment of the split. Normal operation was restored when the majority of the network downgraded to version 0.7 of the bitcoin software, selecting the backwards-compatible version of the blockchain. As a result, this blockchain became the longest chain and could be accepted by all participants, regardless of their bitcoin software version. During the split, the exchange briefly halted bitcoin deposits and the price dropped by 23% to $37 before recovering to the previous level of approximately $48 in the following hours. The US (FinCEN) established regulatory guidelines for "decentralized virtual currencies" such as bitcoin, classifying American bitcoin miners who sell their generated bitcoins as Money Service Businesses (MSBs), that are subject to registration or other legal obligations. In April, exchanges and Mt. Gox experienced processing delays due to insufficient capacity resulting in the bitcoin price dropping from $266 to $76 before returning to $160 within six hours. The bitcoin price rose to $259 on 10 April, but then crashed by 83% to $45 over the next three days. On 15 May 2013, US authorities seized accounts associated with Mt. Gox after discovering it had not registered as a with FinCEN in the US. On 23 June 2013, the US listed ₿11.02 as a seized asset in a seizure notice pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § 881. This marked the first time a government agency had seized bitcoin. The FBI seized about ₿30,000 in October 2013 from the website Silk Road, following the arrest of . These bitcoins were sold at by the to venture capital investor . Bitcoin's price rose to $755 on 19 November and crashed by 50% to $378 the same day. On 30 November 2013, the price reached $1,163 before starting a long-term crash, declining by 87% to $152 in January 2015. On 5 December 2013, the prohibited Chinese financial institutions from using bitcoin. After the announcement, the value of bitcoin dropped, and no longer accepted bitcoins for certain services. Buying real-world goods with any virtual currency had been illegal in China since at least 2009. In 2014, prices started at $770 and fell to $314 for the year. On 30 July 2014, the started accepting donations of bitcoin. In 2015, prices started at $314 and rose to $434 for the year. In 2016, prices rose and climbed up to $998 by 1 January 2017. Release 0.10 of the software was made public on 16 February 2015. It introduced a consensus library which gave programmers easy access to the rules governing on the network. In version 0.11.2 developers added a new feature which allowed transactions to be made unspendable until a specific time in the future. In July 2016, the CheckSequenceVerify soft fork activated. In August 2016, the Bitfinex cryptocurrency exchange platform was in the second-largest breach of a Bitcoin exchange platform up to that time, and ₿119,756, worth about $72 million at the time, were stolen. In October 2016, Bitcoin Core's 0.13.1 release featured the "Segwit" soft fork that included a scaling improvement aiming to optimize the bitcoin blocksize. [ ] The patch was originally finalized in April, and 35 developers were engaged to deploy it. [ ] This release featured Segregated Witness ( ) which aimed to place downward pressure on transaction fees as well as increase the maximum transaction capacity of the network. [ ] The 0.13.1 release endured extensive testing and research leading to some delays in its release date. [ ] SegWit prevents various forms of transaction . [ ] 2017–2019 Research produced by the estimated that in 2017, there were 2.9 to 5.8 million unique users using a , most of them using bitcoin. On 15 July 2017, the controversial [SegWit] software upgrade was approved ("locked-in"). Segwit was intended to support the as well as improve scalability. SegWit was subsequently activated on the network on 24 August 2017. The bitcoin price rose almost 50% in the week following SegWit's approval. On 21 July 2017, bitcoin was trading at $2,748, up 52% from 14 July 2017's $1,835. Supporters of large blocks who were dissatisfied with the activation of SegWit forked the software on 1 August 2017 to create , becoming one of many such as . Prices started at $998 in 2017 and rose to $13,412.44 on 1 January 2018, after reaching its all-time high of $19,783.06 on 17 December 2017. China banned trading in bitcoin, with first steps taken in September 2017, and a complete ban that started on 1 February 2018. Bitcoin prices then fell from $9,052 to $6,914 on 5 February 2018. The percentage of bitcoin trading in the Chinese fell from over 90% in September 2017 to less than 1% in June 2018. Throughout the rest of the first half of 2018, bitcoin's price fluctuated between $11,480 and $5,848. On 1 July 2018, bitcoin's price was $6,343. The price on 1 January 2019 was $3,747, down 72% for 2018 and down 81% since the all-time high. In September 2018, an anonymous party discovered and reported an invalid-block denial-of-server vulnerability to developers of Bitcoin Core, Bitcoin ABC and Bitcoin Unlimited. Further analysis by bitcoin developers showed the issue could also allow the creation of blocks violating the 21 million coin limit and - was assigned and the issue resolved. [ ] Bitcoin prices were negatively affected by several hacks or thefts from cryptocurrency exchanges, including thefts from in January 2018, in June, and Bancor in July. For the first six months of 2018, $761 million worth of cryptocurrencies was reported stolen from exchanges. Bitcoin's price was affected even though other cryptocurrencies were stolen at Coinrail and Bancor as investors worried about the security of cryptocurrency exchanges. In September 2019, the (the owner of the ) began trading of bitcoin futures on its exchange called . Bakkt also announced that it would launch options on bitcoin in December 2019. In December 2019, removed bitcoin and cryptocurrency videos, but later restored the content after judging they had "made the wrong call". In February 2019, Canadian cryptocurrency exchange failed with approximately $200 million missing. By June 2019 the price had recovered to $13,000. 2020–present Bitcoin price in US dollars On 13 March 2020, bitcoin fell below $4,000 during a broad market selloff, after trading above $10,000 in February 2020. On 11 March 2020, 281,000 bitcoins were sold, held by owners for only thirty days. This compared to ₿4,131 that had laid dormant for a year or more, indicating that the vast majority of the bitcoin volatility on that day was from recent buyers. During the week of 11 March 2020, cryptocurrency exchange experienced an 83% increase in the number of account signups over the week of bitcoin's price collapse, a result of buyers looking to capitalize on the low price. These events were attributed to the onset of the . In August 2020, invested $250 million in bitcoin as a treasury reserve asset. In October 2020, placed approximately 1% of total assets ($50 million) in bitcoin. In November 2020, announced that US users could buy, hold, or sell bitcoin. On 30 November 2020, the bitcoin value reached a new all-time high of $19,860, topping the previous high of December 2017. , founder of , was convicted and sentenced to five years in prison for money laundering in France while refusing to testify during his trial. In December 2020, announced a bitcoin purchase of US$100 million, or roughly 0.04% of its general investment account. On 19 January 2021, placed the handle #Bitcoin in his profile, tweeting "In retrospect, it was inevitable", which caused the price to briefly rise about $5,000 in an hour to $37,299. On 25 January 2021, Microstrategy announced that it continued to buy bitcoin and as of the same date it had holdings of ₿70,784 worth $2.38 billion. On 8 February 2021 announcement of a bitcoin purchase of US$1.5 billion and the plan to start accepting bitcoin as payment for vehicles, pushed the bitcoin price to $44,141. On 18 February 2021, Elon Musk stated that "owning bitcoin was only a little better than holding conventional cash, but that the slight difference made it a better asset to hold". After 49 days of accepting the digital currency, Tesla reversed course on 12 May 2021, saying they would no longer take bitcoin due to concerns that "mining" the cryptocurrency was contributing to the consumption of fossil fuels and climate change. The decision resulted in the price of bitcoin dropping around 12% on 13 May. During a July bitcoin conference, Musk suggested Tesla could possibly help bitcoin miners switch to renewable energy in the future and also stated at the same conference that if bitcoin mining reaches, and trends above 50 percent renewable energy usage, that "Tesla would resume accepting bitcoin." The price for bitcoin rose after this announcement. In June 2021, the network software upgrade was approved, adding support for , improved functionality of and . The upgrade was activated in November. In September 2021, became , alongside the US dollar. On 16 October 2021, the approved the ProShares Bitcoin Strategy ETF, a cash-settled (ETF). The first bitcoin ETF in the United States gained 5% on its first trading day on 19 October 2021. On 25 March 2022, stated that Russia might accept bitcoin for payment for oil and gas exports, in response to sanctions stemming from the . On 27 April 2022 adopted bitcoin as legal tender alongside the . On May 10, 2022, the bitcoin price fell to $31,324, as a result of a collapse of a UST experiment named Terra, with bitcoin down more than 50% since the November 2021 high. By June 13, 2022, the (a loan company) halted withdrawals and resulted in the bitcoin price falling below $20,000. In May 2022, following a vote by editors the previous month, the Wikimedia Foundation announced it would stop accepting donations in bitcoin or other cryptocurrencies—eight years after it had first started taking contributions in bitcoin. Associated ideologies Satoshi Nakamoto stated in an essay accompanying bitcoin's code that: "The root problem with conventional currencies is all the trust that's required to make it work. The central bank must be trusted not to debase the currency, but the history of fiat currencies is full of breaches of that trust." Austrian economics roots According to the , the decentralization of money offered by bitcoin has its theoretical roots in the , especially with in his book Denationalisation of Money: The Argument Refined , in which Hayek advocates a complete in the production, distribution and management of money to end the monopoly of . : 22 Anarchism and libertarianism Further information: According to , and were attracted to the philosophical idea behind bitcoin. Early bitcoin supporter said: "At first, almost everyone who got involved did so for philosophical reasons. We saw bitcoin as a great idea, as a way to separate money from the state." describes bitcoin as "a techno-anarchist project to create an online version of cash, a way for people to transact without the possibility of interference from malicious governments or banks". Economist argues that cryptocurrencies like bitcoin are "something of a cult" based in "paranoid fantasies" of government power. External video , BraveTheWorld, 4:38 Nigel Dodd argues in The Social Life of Bitcoin that the essence of the bitcoin ideology is to remove money from social, as well as governmental, control. Dodd quotes a video, with , , , , , Trace Meyer and other proponents of bitcoin reading The Declaration of Bitcoin's Independence . The declaration includes a message of crypto-anarchism with the words: "Bitcoin is inherently anti-establishment, anti-system, and anti-state. Bitcoin undermines governments and disrupts institutions because bitcoin is fundamentally humanitarian." David Golumbia says that the ideas influencing bitcoin advocates emerge from right-wing extremist movements such as the and the and their anti-Central Bank rhetoric, or, more recently, and -style libertarianism. , who owns a "good stake" in bitcoin, considers it to be "disruptive populism. It takes control back from central authorities. It's revolutionary." A 2014 study of data found correlations between bitcoin-related searches and ones related to computer programming and illegal activity, but not libertarianism or investment topics. Economics Main article: Bitcoin is a designed to work in peer-to-peer transactions as a . Bitcoins have three qualities useful in a currency, according to The Economist in January 2015: they are "hard to earn, limited in supply and easy to verify". Per some researchers, as of 2015 , bitcoin functions more as a than as a currency. Economists define as serving the following three purposes: a , a , and a . According to The Economist in 2014, bitcoin functions best as a medium of exchange. However, this is debated, and a 2018 assessment by The Economist stated that cryptocurrencies met none of these three criteria. Yale economist writes that bitcoin has potential as a unit of account for measuring the relative value of goods, as with Chile's , but that "Bitcoin in its present form ... doesn't really solve any sensible economic problem". According to research by the , between 2.9 million and 5.8 million unique users used a in 2017, most of them for bitcoin. The number of users has grown significantly since 2013, when there were 300,000–1.3 million users. Acceptance by merchants , a Fortune 500 subscription TV provider, has been described as the first large company to accept bitcoin, in 2014. Bloomberg reported that the largest 17 crypto merchant-processing services handled $69 million in June 2018, down from $411 million in September 2017. Bitcoin is "not actually usable" for retail transactions because of high costs and the inability to process , according to Nicholas Weaver, a researcher quoted by Bloomberg . High price volatility and transaction fees make paying for small retail purchases with bitcoin impractical, according to economist Kim Grauer. However, bitcoin continues to be used for large-item purchases on sites such as , and for cross-border payments to and other vendors. In 2017 and 2018, bitcoin's acceptance among major online retailers included only three of the top 500 U.S. online merchants, down from five in 2016. Reasons for this decline include high transaction fees due to bitcoin's scalability issues and long transaction times. As of 2018, the overwhelming majority of bitcoin transactions took place on , rather than being used in transactions with merchants. Delays processing payments through the blockchain of about ten minutes make bitcoin use very difficult in a retail setting. Prices are not usually quoted in units of bitcoin and many trades involve one, or sometimes two, conversions into conventional currencies. Merchants that do accept bitcoin payments may use payment service providers to perform the conversions. Financial institutions Bitcoins can be bought on . Per researchers, "there is little sign of bitcoin use" in international remittances despite high fees charged by banks and who compete in this market. The , however, mentions the use of bitcoin by Hong Kong workers to transfer money home. In 2014, the closed accounts of businesses with ties to bitcoin, and refused to serve a hedge fund with links to bitcoin. Australian banks in general have been reported as closing down bank accounts of operators of businesses involving the currency. On 10 December 2017, the started trading bitcoin futures, followed by the , which started trading bitcoin futures on 17 December 2017. In September 2019 the , at the request of , ran tests to determine if bitcoin and could be held in central bank's reserves. The request was motivated by oil company's goal to pay its suppliers. François R. Velde, Senior Economist at the , described bitcoin as "an elegant solution to the problem of creating a digital currency". David Andolfatto, Vice President at the , stated that bitcoin is a threat to the establishment, which he argues is a good thing for the and other , because it prompts these institutions to operate sound policies. : 33 As an investment The have purchased bitcoin. In 2013, The Washington Post reported a claim that they owned 1% of all the bitcoins in existence at the time. Other methods of investment are bitcoin funds. The first regulated bitcoin fund was established in in July 2014 and approved by the Jersey Financial Services Commission. Forbes named bitcoin the best investment of 2013. In 2014, Bloomberg named bitcoin one of its worst investments of the year. In 2015, bitcoin topped Bloomberg's currency tables. According to bitinfocharts.com, in 2017, there were 9,272 bitcoin wallets with more than $1 million worth of bitcoins. The exact number of bitcoin millionaires is uncertain as a single person can have more than one bitcoin wallet. Venture capital 's invested 3 million in . In 2012, an incubator for bitcoin-focused start-ups was founded by Adam Draper, with financing help from his father, venture capitalist , one of the largest bitcoin holders after winning an auction of ₿30,000, at the time called "mystery buyer". The company's goal is to fund 100 bitcoin businesses within 2–3 years with $10,000 to $20,000 for a 6% stake. Investors also invest in bitcoin mining. According to a 2015 study by Paolo Tasca, bitcoin startups raised almost $1 billion in three years (Q1 2012 – Q1 2015). Price and volatility The price of bitcoins has gone through cycles of appreciation and depreciation referred to by some as and busts. In 2011, the value of one bitcoin rapidly rose from about US$0.30 to US$32 before returning to US$2. In the latter half of 2012 and during the , the bitcoin price began to rise, reaching a high of US$266 on 10 April 2013, before crashing to around US$50. On 29 November 2013, the cost of one bitcoin rose to a peak of US$1,242. In 2014, the price fell sharply, and as of April remained depressed at little more than half 2013 prices. As of August 2014 it was under US$600. According to , as of 30 September 2014 , bitcoin has seven times greater than gold, eight times greater than the , and 18 times greater than the US dollar. Hodl is a meme created in reference to holding (as opposed to selling) during periods of volatility. Unusual for an asset, bitcoin weekend trading during December 2020 was higher than for weekdays. (using high and ) have attempted to use the volatility to . At the end of January 2021, such positions were over $1 billion, their highest of all time. As of 8 February 2021 , the closing price of bitcoin equaled US$44,797. Legal status, tax and regulation Further information: The legal status of bitcoin varies substantially from country to country and is still undefined or changing in many of them. Regulations and bans that apply to bitcoin probably extend to similar cryptocurrency systems. Because of its decentralized nature and its trading on online exchanges located in many countries, regulation of bitcoin has been difficult. However, the use of bitcoin can be criminalized, and shutting down exchanges and the peer-to-peer economy in a given country would constitute a ban. According to the , an "absolute ban" on trading or using cryptocurrencies applies in nine countries: Algeria, Bolivia, Egypt, Iraq, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, Vietnam, and the United Arab Emirates. An "implicit ban" applies in another 42 countries, which include Bahrain, Bangladesh, China, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Indonesia, Kuwait, Lesotho, Lithuania, Macau, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and Taiwan. On 22 October 2015, the European Court of Justice ruled that bitcoin transactions would be exempt from Value Added Tax. Regulatory warnings The has issued four "Customer Advisories" for bitcoin and related investments. A July 2018 warning emphasized that trading in any cryptocurrency is often , and there is a risk of theft from hacking, and fraud. In May 2014 the warned that investments involving bitcoin might have high rates of fraud, and that investors might be solicited on social media sites. An earlier "Investor Alert" warned about the use of bitcoin in . The issued a warning in 2013 focusing on the lack of regulation of bitcoin, the chance that exchanges would be hacked, the volatility of bitcoin's price, and general fraud. and the have both issued investor alerts about bitcoin. Price manipulation investigation An official investigation into bitcoin traders was reported in May 2018. The U.S. Justice Department launched an investigation into possible price manipulation, including the techniques of and . The U.S. federal investigation was prompted by concerns of possible manipulation during futures settlement dates. The final settlement price of CME bitcoin futures is determined by prices on four exchanges, , , itBit and . Following the first delivery date in January 2018, the CME requested extensive detailed trading information but several of the exchanges refused to provide it and later provided only limited data. The then subpoenaed the data from the exchanges. State and provincial securities regulators, coordinated through the , are investigating "bitcoin scams" and in 40 jurisdictions. Academic research published in the concluded that price manipulation occurred during the Mt Gox bitcoin theft and that the market remains vulnerable to manipulation. The history of hacks, fraud and theft involving bitcoin dates back to at least 2011. Research by John M. Griffin and Amin Shams in 2018 suggests that trading associated with increases in the amount of the and associated trading at the exchange account for about half of the price increase in bitcoin in late 2017. J.L. van der Velde, CEO of both Bitfinex and Tether, denied the claims of price manipulation: "Bitfinex nor Tether is, or has ever, engaged in any sort of market or price manipulation. Tether issuances cannot be used to prop up the price of bitcoin or any other coin/token on Bitfinex." Use by governments See also: and In June 2021, the voted to make bitcoin in , alongside the US dollar. The law took effect on 7 September, making El Salvador the first country to do so. The implementation of the law has been met with protests and calls to make the currency optional, not compulsory. According to a survey by the , the majority of Salvadorans disagreed with using cryptocurrency as a legal tender, and a survey by the Center for Citizen Studies (CEC) showed that 91% of the country prefers the dollar over bitcoin. As of October 2021, the country's government was exploring mining bitcoin with power and issuing bonds tied to bitcoin. According to a survey done by the Central American University 100 days after the Bitcoin Law came into force: 34.8% of the population has no confidence in bitcoin, 35.3% has little confidence, 13.2% has some confidence, and 14.1% has a lot of confidence. 56.6% of respondents have downloaded the government bitcoin wallet; among them 62.9% has never used it or only once whereas 36.3% uses bitcoin at least once a month. In 2022, the (IMF) urged El Salvador to reverse its decision after bitcoin lost half its value in two months. The IMF also warned that it would be difficult to get a loan from the institution. According to one report in 2022, 80% of businesses refused to accept bitcoin despite being legally required to. In April 2022, the (CAR) adopted Bitcoin as legal tender alongside the . After El Salvador, CAR is the second country to do so. is accepting donations in cryptocurrency, including bitcoin, to fund the resistance against the . According to the officials, 40% of the Ukraine's military suppliers are willing to accept cryptocurrencies without converting them into euros or dollars. In March 2022, Ukraine has passed a law that creates a legal framework for the cryptocurrency industry in the country, including judicial protection of the right to own virtual assets. In the same month, a cryptocurrency exchange was integrated into the Ukrainian e-governance service . announced pending regulations that would require bitcoin miners in Iran to sell bitcoin to the , and the central bank would use it for imports. Iran, as of October 2020, had issued over 1,000 bitcoin mining licenses. The Iranian government initially took a stance against cryptocurrency, but later changed it after seeing that digital currency could be used to circumvent . The US listed two Iranians and their bitcoin addresses as part of its for their role in the whose ransom was paid in bitcoin. Some accept tax payments in bitcoin, including ( ) and ( ). Economic and legal concerns Further information: and Bitcoin, along with other cryptocurrencies, has been described as an by at least eight laureates, including , , and . Economist and columnist has described bitcoin as "a bubble wrapped in techno-mysticism inside a cocoon of libertarian ideology", economist of New York University has called bitcoin the "mother of all bubbles", and University of Chicago economist has compared it to the 17th-century . Journalists, economists, investors, and the have voiced concerns that bitcoin is a . , a law professor at the , states that "a real Ponzi scheme takes fraud; bitcoin, by contrast, seems more like a collective delusion." A 2014 report by the concluded that bitcoin was not a deliberate Ponzi scheme. : 7 Also in 2014, the examined concerns that bitcoin might be a pyramid scheme, and concluded that "since in the case of bitcoin the typical promises of profits are lacking, it cannot be assumed that bitcoin is a pyramid scheme." : 21 Bitcoin wealth is highly concentrated, with 0.01% holding 27% of in-circulation currency, as of 2021. Use in illegal transactions Further information: and The use of bitcoin by criminals has attracted the attention of financial regulators, legislative bodies, law enforcement, and the media. Several news outlets have asserted that the popularity of bitcoins hinges on the ability to use them to purchase illegal goods. Nobel-prize winning economist says that bitcoin's anonymity encourages money laundering and other crimes. Environmental effects This section is an excerpt from . [ ] The are considerable. One such environmental effect is that it . This is because using electricity partially generated by and . When burned, coal and natural gas , which heat the Earth and change the climate. As of 2022 , such bitcoin mining is estimated to be responsible for 0.1% of world greenhouse gas emissions. A second environmental effect is the air pollution caused by coal-fired electricity generation, and a third is the due to the short life expectancy of bitcoin-mining equipment. Bitcoin is a made by , while some other cryptocurrencies, such as , are made by , which consumes less electricity. As of 2022 , the (CCAF) estimates that Bitcoin consumes around 100 (360 ) annually, and says bitcoin mining uses about as much electricity as Egypt. But it is difficult to find out how the electricity used for mining was generated, and thus Bitcoin's . One study found that from 2016 to 2021, each US dollar worth of bitcoin mined caused 35 cents worth of climate damage, comparable to the and the gasoline industry. As of 2021, Bitcoin's annual e-waste is estimated to be over 30,000 tonnes, which is comparable to the small IT equipment waste produced by the Netherlands. Creating one bitcoin generates 270 to 380 grams (9.5 to 13.4 oz) of e-waste. The average lifespan of bitcoin-mining devices is estimated to be about 1.3 years. Unlike most computing hardware, the used have no alternative use beyond bitcoin mining. Reducing Bitcoin's environmental effects is difficult; possible remedies include making bitcoin only where or when there is excess . Some policymakers have called for further restrictions or . Software implementation Bitcoin Core The start screen under Initial release 2009 24.0.1 (12 December 2022 ; 4 months ago ( 2022-12-12 ) ) Written in , , Website Bitcoin Core is that serves as a bitcoin (the set of which form the ) and provides a which fully verifies payments. It is considered to be bitcoin's . Initially, the software was published by under the name "Bitcoin", and later renamed to "Bitcoin Core" to distinguish it from the . It is also known as the Satoshi client . The Digital Currency Initiative funds some of the development of Bitcoin Core. The project also maintains the cryptography library libsecp256k1. Bitcoin Core includes a transaction verification engine and connects to the bitcoin network as a full . Moreover, a , which can be used to transfer funds, is included by default. The wallet allows for the sending and receiving of bitcoins. It does not facilitate the buying or selling of bitcoin. It allows users to generate to receive payment. The software validates the entire , which includes all bitcoin transactions ever. This which has reached more than 235 gigabytes in size as of Jan 2019, must be downloaded or synchronized before full participation of the client may occur. Although the complete blockchain is not needed all at once since it is possible to run in pruning mode. A -based with a interface, bitcoind, is bundled with Bitcoin Core. It also provides access to testnet, a global testing environment that imitates the bitcoin main network using an alternative blockchain where valueless "test bitcoins" are used. Regtest or Regression Test Mode creates a private blockchain which is used as a local testing environment. Finally, bitcoin-cli, a simple program which allows users to send commands to bitcoind, is also included. Checkpoints which have been hard coded into the client are used only to prevent Denial of Service attacks against nodes which are initially syncing the chain. For this reason the checkpoints included are only as of several years ago. [ ] A one megabyte block size limit was added in 2010 by Satoshi Nakamoto. This limited the maximum network capacity to about three transactions per second. Since then, network capacity has been improved incrementally both through block size increases and improved wallet behavior. A network alert system was included by Satoshi Nakamoto as a way of informing users of important news regarding bitcoin. In November 2016 it was retired. It had become obsolete as news on bitcoin is now widely disseminated. Bitcoin Core includes a scripting language inspired by that can define transactions and specify parameters. ScriptPubKey is used to "lock" transactions based on a set of future conditions. scriptSig is used to meet these conditions or "unlock" a transaction. on the data are performed by various OP_Codes. Two are used – main and alt. is forbidden. Bitcoin Core uses to timestamp merge commits. The original creator of the bitcoin client has described their approach to the software's authorship as it being written first to prove to themselves that the concept of purely peer-to-peer electronic cash was valid and that a paper with solutions could be written. The lead developer is Wladimir J. van der Laan, who took over the role on 8 April 2014. was the former lead maintainer for the software client. Andresen left the role of lead developer for bitcoin to work on the strategic development of its technology. Bitcoin Core in 2015 was central to a dispute with , a competing client that sought to increase the blocksize. Over a dozen different companies and industry groups fund the development of Bitcoin Core. In popular culture Term "HODL" Hodl ( ; often written ) is slang in the community for a cryptocurrency rather than selling it. A person who does this is known as a Hodler. It originated in a December 2013 post on the Bitcoin Forum message board by an apparently inebriated user who posted with a typo in the subject, "I AM HODLING." It is often humorously suggested to be a to "hold on for dear life". In 2017, listed it as one of the essential slang terms in bitcoin culture, and described it as a stance, "to stay invested in bitcoin and not to capitulate in the face of plunging prices." referred to it as the "favorite " of bitcoin holders. referred to it as a mantra for holders during market routs. Literature In 's 2013 science fiction novel , the universal payment system is known as "bitcoin" and operates using cryptography. Stross later blogged that the reference was intentional, saying "I wrote Neptune's Brood in 2011. Bitcoin was obscure back then, and I figured had just enough name recognition to be a useful term for an interstellar currency: it'd clue people in that it was a networked digital currency." Film The 2014 documentary portrays the diversity of motives behind the use of bitcoin by interviewing people who use it. These include a computer programmer and a drug dealer. The 2016 documentary Banking on Bitcoin is an introduction to the beginnings of bitcoin and the ideas behind cryptocurrency today. Academia In September 2015, the establishment of the ( ) was announced. It covers studies of cryptocurrencies and related technologies, and is published by the . The journal encourages authors to digitally sign a of submitted papers, which will then be into the bitcoin blockchain. Authors are also asked to include a personal bitcoin address in the first page of their papers. See also : Notes ^ As of 2014 , BTC is a commonly used code. It does not conform to as BT is the country code of Bhutan, and ISO 4217 requires the first letter used in global commodities to be 'X'. ^ As of 2014 , XBT, a code that conforms to ISO 4217 though is not officially part of it, is used by , , and . The genesis block is block number 0. The timestamp of the block is 2009-01-03 18:15:05. This block is unlike all other blocks in that it does not have a previous block to reference. Bitcoin uses a custom called " secp256k1 " with the algorithm to produce . The equation for this curve is y 2 =x 3 +7 . A proposed upgrade that would add support for is in development. : 101 Relative mining difficulty is defined as the ratio of the difficulty target on 9 January 2009 to the current difficulty target. It is misleading to think that there is an analogy between gold mining and bitcoin mining. The fact is that gold miners are rewarded for producing gold, while bitcoin miners are not rewarded for producing bitcoins; they are rewarded for their record-keeping services. The system used is based on 's 1997 anti- scheme, . [ ] The exact number is ₿20,999,999.9769. : ch. 8 The private key can be printed as a , a , or a . Usually, the public key or bitcoin address is also printed, so that a holder of a paper wallet can check or add funds without exposing the private key to a device. According to some reports, the law was approved on 8 June. According to others, it was approved on 9 June. The law was voted during the 8 June parliamentary session, and published in the official journal on 9 June. References ^ . Unicode Consortium. 20 June 2017. from the original on 20 June 2017 . Retrieved 20 June 2017 . ^ Mick, Jason (12 June 2011). . Daily Tech. Archived from on 20 January 2013 . Retrieved 30 September 2012 . ^ Nakamoto, Satoshi (31 October 2008). (PDF) . bitcoin.org. (PDF) from the original on 20 March 2014 . Retrieved 28 April 2014 . . Retrieved 13 December 2022 – via . ^ (PDF) . fincen.gov . Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. 19 November 2013. (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2016 . Retrieved 1 June 2014 . Nakamoto;  et al. (1 April 2016). . . from the original on 1 July 2018. ^ (2014). Mastering Bitcoin: Unlocking Digital Crypto-Currencies . O'Reilly Media. . ^ . The editorial board. Financial Times . 7 September 2021 . Retrieved 7 September 2021 . On Tuesday, the small Central American nation became the first in the world to adopt bitcoin as an official currency. ^ . Bloomberg.com . 28 April 2022 . Retrieved 28 April 2022 . (PDF) . BIS . March 2018 . Retrieved 21 January 2023 . ^ S., L. (2 November 2015). . The Economist . The Economist Newspaper Limited. from the original on 21 August 2016 . Retrieved 23 September 2016 . ^ Davis, Joshua (10 October 2011). . . from the original on 1 November 2014 . Retrieved 31 October 2014 . Vigna, Paul; Casey, Michael J. (2015). The Age of Cryptocurrency: How Bitcoin and Digital Money Are Challenging the Global Economic Order (1 ed.). New York: St. Martin's Press. . ^ . . Archived from on 2 January 2015 . Retrieved 28 December 2014 . (PDF) . United States Library of Congress. Sources for bitcoin's low usage in El Salvador as of 2022: García, Marcela. . BostonGlobe.com . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . Kurmanaev, Anatoly; Avelar, Bryan (5 July 2022). . The New York Times . . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . . La Prensa Latina Media . 25 May 2022 . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . . Washington Post . . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . ^ Wolff-Mann, Ethan (27 April 2018). . Yahoo Finance . from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 . Jones, Benjamin A.; Goodkind, Andrew L.; Berrens, Robert P. (29 September 2022). . . (12): 14512. : . : . . . Huang, Jon; O’Neill, Claire; Tabuchi, Hiroko (3 September 2021). . The New York Times . . Retrieved 26 October 2022 . Gonzalez, Oscar. . CNET . Retrieved 26 October 2022 . Sparkes, Matthew (28 September 2022). . . Retrieved 23 October 2022 . . Int'l Energy Agency . Retrieved 25 January 2023 . Romain Dillet (9 August 2013). . . from the original on 1 November 2014 . Retrieved 2 November 2014 . . CNN Money . CNN. from the original on 27 October 2014 . Retrieved 2 November 2014 . . xe.com. from the original on 2 November 2014 . Retrieved 2 November 2014 . (PDF) . The Law Library of Congress, Global Legal Research Center. January 2014. (PDF) from the original on 14 October 2014 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 . Katie Pisa & Natasha Maguder (9 July 2014). . cnn.com . CNN. from the original on 18 June 2015 . Retrieved 23 April 2015 . ^ . The Economist . The Economist Newspaper Limited. 31 October 2015. from the original on 3 July 2016 . Retrieved 3 July 2016 . ^ Rainer Böhme; Nicolas Christin; Benjamin Edelman; Tyler Moore (2015). . . (2): 213–238. : . Sparkes, Matthew (9 June 2014). . The Daily Telegraph . London. from the original on 23 January 2015 . Retrieved 7 January 2015 . (PDF) . National Institute of Standards Technology (NIST). p. 32 . Retrieved 29 December 2022 . ^ Joshua A. Kroll; Ian C. Davey; Edward W. Felten (11–12 June 2013). (PDF) . The Twelfth Workshop on the Economics of Information Security (WEIS 2013) . (PDF) from the original on 9 May 2016 . Retrieved 26 April 2016 . A transaction fee is like a tip or gratuity left for the miner. Orcutt, Mike (19 May 2015). . MIT Technology Review . from the original on 18 October 2017 . Retrieved 22 June 2017 . Houria, Azine; Mohamed Abdelkader, Bencherif; Abderezzak, Guessoum (1 March 2019). "A comparison between the secp256r1 and the koblitz secp256k1 bitcoin curves". Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science . (3): 910. : . . Van Hijfte, Stijn (2020). Blockchain Platforms: A Look at the Underbelly of Distributed Platforms . Morgan & Claypool Publishers. . . CBS DC . 29 November 2013. from the original on 15 January 2014 . Retrieved 23 January 2014 . Krause, Elliott (5 July 2018). . The Wall Street Journal . from the original on 9 July 2018 . Retrieved 8 July 2018 . ^ Jeffries, Adrianne (19 December 2013). . The Verge . from the original on 27 July 2019 . Retrieved 17 January 2014 . Harney, Alexandra; Stecklow, Steve (16 November 2017). . Reuters . from the original on 29 August 2019 . Retrieved 6 September 2018 . . bitinfocharts.com . Retrieved 28 December 2022 . Martindale, Jon (16 March 2018). . Digital Trends . from the original on 30 June 2019 . Retrieved 1 July 2019 . . 30 January 2018. from the original on 2 February 2018 . Retrieved 2 February 2018 . . World Oil . 26 January 2018. from the original on 30 January 2018. ^ . . from the original on 3 November 2014 . Retrieved 2 November 2014 . ^ Andolfatto, David (31 March 2014). (PDF) . Dialogue with the Fed . Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. (PDF) from the original on 9 April 2014 . Retrieved 16 April 2014 . Sherman, Alan; Javani, Farid; Golaszewski, Enis (25 March 2019). "On the Origins and Variations of Blockchain Technologies". IEEE Security & Privacy . (1): 72–77. : . : . . (The ratio of all hashes over valid hashes is D x 4,295,032,833, where D is the published "Difficulty" figure.). Blockchain.info. from the original on 8 April 2015 . Retrieved 8 April 2022 . . . 4 January 2014. Hampton, Nikolai (5 September 2016). . Computerworld . IDG. from the original on 6 September 2016 . Retrieved 5 September 2016 . Biggs, John (8 April 2013). . Techcrunch. from the original on 6 July 2017. Woods, Nick (2021). Bitcoin for Beginners: An Introduction to Bitcoin, Blockchain and Cryptocurrency . Publishing Forte. Chapter 4, Section 2. . ^ Ashlee Vance (14 November 2013). . . Archived from on 21 November 2013 . Retrieved 24 November 2013 . Browne, Ryan (11 May 2020). . CNBC . Ritchie S. King; Sam Williams; David Yanofsky (17 December 2013). . qz.com . Atlantic Media Co. from the original on 17 December 2013 . Retrieved 17 December 2013 . Meola, Andrew (5 October 2017). . Business Insider . from the original on 27 April 2018 . Retrieved 26 July 2018 . Jerry Brito & Andrea Castillo (2013). (PDF) . Mercatus Center . . (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 22 October 2013 . Tschorsch, Florian; Scheuermann, Björn (2016). "Bitcoin and Beyond: A Technical Survey on Decentralized Digital Currencies". IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials . (3): 2084–2123. : . . Beikverdi, A.; Song, J. (2015). Trend of centralization in Bitcoin's distributed network . 2015 IEEE/ACIS 16th International Conference on Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing (SNPD) . pp. 1–6. : . . . ^ Gervais, Arthur; Karame, Ghassan O.; Capkun, Vedran; Capkun, Srdjan. . InfoQ . InfoQ & . from the original on 10 October 2016 . Retrieved 11 October 2016 . Wilhelm, Alex. . TechCrunch . from the original on 5 December 2017 . Retrieved 25 January 2018 . Chan, Edwin (9 April 2019). . Bloomberg.com . from the original on 18 December 2019 . Retrieved 10 April 2019 . While China was once home to about 70 percent of Bitcoin mining and 90 percent of trades, authorities have waged a nearly two-year campaign to shrink the crypto industry amid concerns over speculative bubbles, fraud and wasteful energy consumption. Simonite, Tom (5 September 2013). . MIT Technology Review . Retrieved 2 April 2014 . Lee, Timothy (21 August 2013). . The Washington Post . from the original on 12 October 2013 . Retrieved 2 April 2014 . McMillan, Robert (6 June 2013). . . Conde Nast. from the original on 9 February 2014 . Retrieved 3 April 2020 . . River Financial, Inc . Retrieved 27 December 2022 . Möser, Malte; Böhme, Rainer; Breuker, Dominic (2013). (PDF) . 2013 APWG eCrime Researchers Summit. . . (PDF) from the original on 26 June 2018 . Retrieved 19 June 2019 . Adam Serwer & Dana Liebelson (10 April 2013). . motherjones.com . Mother Jones. from the original on 27 April 2014 . Retrieved 26 April 2014 . . The Economist . 30 November 2013. from the original on 30 November 2013 . Retrieved 30 November 2013 . Skudnov, Rostislav (2012). (PDF) (Bachelor's Thesis). . (PDF) from the original on 18 January 2014 . Retrieved 16 January 2014 . . bitcoin.org . from the original on 27 February 2015 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 . Metz, Cade (19 August 2015). . . Condé Nast. from the original on 30 June 2016 . Retrieved 3 July 2016 . ^ Vigna, Paul (17 January 2016). . The Wall Street Journal . from the original on 20 August 2016 . Retrieved 8 November 2016 . Allison, Ian (28 April 2017). . . from the original on 28 April 2017 . Retrieved 28 April 2017 . Gervais, Arthur; O. Karame, Ghassan; Gruber, Damian; Capkun, Srdjan. (PDF) . (PDF) from the original on 5 October 2016 . Retrieved 3 September 2016 . Bill Barhydt (4 June 2014). . NBCUniversal. from the original on 3 April 2015 . Retrieved 2 April 2015 . . bbc.com . BBC. 4 March 2014. from the original on 12 March 2014 . Retrieved 13 March 2014 . ^ Roberts, Daniel (15 December 2017). . Yahoo Finance . from the original on 17 February 2018 . Retrieved 17 February 2018 . ^ Barski, Conrad; Wilmer, Chris (2015). Bitcoin for the Befuddled . . . ^ Arapinis, Myrto; Gkaniatsou, Adriana; Karakostas, Dimitris; Kiayias, Aggelos (2019). (PDF) (Technical report). , IOHK. ^ Staff, Verge (13 December 2013). . The Verge . from the original on 10 January 2014 . Retrieved 10 January 2014 . ^ Ahonen, Elias; Rippon, Matthew J.; Kesselman, Howard (2016). Encyclopedia of Physical Bitcoins and Crypto-Currencies . . Mack, Eric (25 October 2011). . . from the original on 26 June 2019 . Retrieved 19 May 2019 . (2012). . Retrieved 17 May 2019 . Bernard, Zoë (2 December 2017). . Business Insider . from the original on 15 June 2018 . Retrieved 15 June 2018 . Finley, Klint (31 October 2018). . Wired . from the original on 5 November 2018 . Retrieved 9 November 2018 . Nakamoto, Satoshi (3 January 2009). . from the original on 21 July 2017. Nakamoto, Satoshi (9 January 2009). . from the original on 26 March 2014. Bustillos, Maria (2 April 2013). . The New Yorker . Condé Nast. from the original on 27 July 2014 . Retrieved 22 December 2013 . Standards vary, but there seems to be a consensus forming around Bitcoin, capitalized, for the system, the software, and the network it runs on, and bitcoin, lowercase, for the currency itself. Vigna, Paul (3 March 2014). . . from the original on 19 April 2014 . Retrieved 21 April 2014 . Metcalf, Allan (14 April 2014). . Lingua Franca blog. The Chronicle of Higher Education (chronicle.com). from the original on 16 April 2014 . Retrieved 19 April 2014 . ^ Wallace, Benjamin (23 November 2011). . Wired . from the original on 31 October 2013 . Retrieved 13 October 2012 . . from the original on 15 October 2013. Pagliery, Jose (2014). . Triumph Books. . from the original on 21 January 2018 . Retrieved 20 January 2018 . . San Francisco Chronicle . 19 May 2013. from the original on 4 January 2015 . Retrieved 24 February 2015 . Peterson, Andrea (3 January 2014). . The Washington Post . from the original on 27 February 2015. Popper, Nathaniel (30 August 2014). . . from the original on 3 September 2014 . Retrieved 2 September 2014 . Cooper, Anderson. . www.cbsnews.com/ . CBS News . Retrieved 8 December 2021 . Griswold, Alison (23 May 2014). . slate.com/ . Slate . Retrieved 8 December 2021 . Hankin, Aaron. . www.investopedia.com/ . Investopedia . Retrieved 8 December 2021 . Sparks, Hannah (24 May 2021). . nypost.com/ . New York Post . Retrieved 8 December 2021 . Kharpal, Arjun (18 June 2018). . CNBC . from the original on 13 September 2018 . Retrieved 13 September 2018 . McMillan, Robert. . Wired . Condé Nast. from the original on 21 October 2016 . Retrieved 7 October 2016 . Simonite, Tom. . MIT Technology Review . Retrieved 6 December 2017 . ^ Odell, Matt (21 September 2015). . TechCrunch . from the original on 26 January 2016 . Retrieved 24 January 2016 . ^ . OfficialData.org . from the original on 4 July 2018 . Retrieved 3 July 2018 . ^ French, Sally (9 February 2017). . Market Watch. from the original on 3 July 2018 . Retrieved 3 July 2018 . Bustillos, Maria (1 April 2013). . The New Yorker . from the original on 2 July 2018 . Retrieved 30 July 2018 . . Bitcoin Project. 1 November 2011 . Retrieved 13 November 2016 . ^ Lee, Timothy (11 March 2013). . arstechnica.com. from the original on 20 April 2013 . Retrieved 15 February 2015 . Blagdon, Jeff (12 March 2013). . The Verge . from the original on 20 April 2013 . Retrieved 12 March 2013 . . from the original on 9 May 2014. Lee, Timothy (20 March 2013). . Arstechnica. from the original on 21 October 2013 . Retrieved 28 July 2017 . Bitcoin miners must also register if they trade in their earnings for dollars. . Finextra. 19 March 2013. from the original on 26 March 2014. (PDF) . Department of the Treasury Financial Crimes Enforcement Network. Archived from (PDF) on 28 March 2013 . Retrieved 19 March 2013 . Roose, Kevin. . Intelligencer . Retrieved 26 January 2022 . . Bitcoinscharts.com. from the original on 25 June 2012 . Retrieved 15 August 2013 . Dillet, Romain. . from the original on 9 October 2013 . Retrieved 15 May 2013 . Berson, Susan A. (2013). . . American Bar Association. from the original on 29 October 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 . Sampson, Tim (2013). . The Daily Dot . from the original on 12 July 2013 . Retrieved 15 October 2013 . ^ Ember, Sydney (2 July 2014). . . The New York Times . from the original on 28 August 2019 . Retrieved 13 June 2019 . . . from the original on 5 April 2014. . from the original on 9 January 2014 . Retrieved 2 November 2013 . Hill, Kashmir. . Forbes . from the original on 2 May 2014. Kelion, Leo (18 December 2013). . bbc.com . BBC. from the original on 19 December 2013 . Retrieved 20 December 2013 . . . Reuters. 6 December 2013. from the original on 23 March 2014 . Retrieved 31 October 2014 . . Bloomberg . New York. 7 December 2013. from the original on 10 December 2013 . Retrieved 11 December 2013 . . English.mofcom.gov.cn. 29 June 2009. from the original on 29 November 2013 . Retrieved 10 January 2014 . Rayman, Noah (30 July 2014). . . Archived from on 30 July 2014 . Retrieved 27 April 2019 . . Bitcoin Project. 13 November 2015 . Retrieved 14 November 2016 . Antonopoulos, Andreas (2017). Mastering Bitcoin: Programming the Open Blockchain (2nd ed.). O'Reilly Media. . BIP-68 and BIP-112 were activated in May 2016 as a soft fork upgrade to the consensus rules. Tsang, Amie (3 August 2016). . The New York Times . from the original on 18 May 2017. . Fortune . from the original on 20 November 2016 . Retrieved 26 October 2016 . . Bitcoin Core . Retrieved 25 October 2016 . . Bitcoin Core . 26 January 2016 . Retrieved 20 October 2018 . ^ Hileman, Garrick; Rauchs, Michel. (PDF) . Cambridge University. (PDF) from the original on 10 April 2017 . Retrieved 14 April 2017 . ^ Vigna, Paul (21 July 2017). . The Wall Street Journal . from the original on 26 January 2020 . Retrieved 26 January 2020 . Selena Larson (1 August 2017). . CNN Tech . Cable News Network. from the original on 27 February 2018 . Retrieved 2 April 2018 . . Fortune . from the original on 14 November 2018 . Retrieved 16 April 2019 . . Xinhuanet. . 7 July 2018. from the original on 10 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 . ^ . Yahoo Finance!. from the original on 28 January 2019 . Retrieved 27 January 2019 . Dawkins, David (10 July 2018). . Express. from the original on 10 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 . . CNBC . 4 January 2019. from the original on 19 January 2019 . Retrieved 18 January 2019 . . Bitcoin Core . Retrieved 23 September 2018 . Chavez-Dreyfuss, Gertrude (3 July 2018). . Reuters . from the original on 4 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 . . Fortune . Bloomberg. 20 July 2018. from the original on 11 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 . Shane, Daniel (11 June 2018). . CNN. from the original on 11 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 . Russell, Jon (10 July 2018). . TechCrunch . from the original on 10 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 . Osipovich, Alexander (22 September 2019). . The Wall Street Journal . from the original on 24 September 2019 . Retrieved 24 September 2019 . Olga Kharif (24 October 2019). . bloomberg.com . Bloomberg. from the original on 24 October 2019 . Retrieved 5 November 2019 . . bbc.com . BBC. 28 December 2019. from the original on 28 December 2019 . Retrieved 28 December 2019 . Alexander, Doug (4 February 2019). . bloomberg.com . Bloomberg. from the original on 16 December 2019 . Retrieved 27 January 2020 . ^ del Castillo, Michael (19 March 2020). . Forbes.com . from the original on 20 March 2020 . Retrieved 21 March 2020 . . CNBC . 13 March 2020 . Retrieved 9 December 2020 . . Washington Business Journal . 11 August 2020 . Retrieved 11 August 2020 . Oliver Effron. . CNN . Retrieved 22 October 2020 . . Techcrunch . 13 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 November 2020 . . CNN . 30 November 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2020 . Catalin Cimpanu (7 December 2020). . ZDNet . Retrieved 9 December 2020 . Olga Kharif (11 December 2020). . Bloomberg . Retrieved 26 December 2020 . Ryan Browne (29 January 2021). . CNBC . Retrieved 2 February 2021 . Will Daniel (26 January 2021). . Business Insider . Retrieved 1 February 2021 . Yun Li (8 February 2021). . CNBC . Retrieved 9 February 2021 . . . Retrieved 19 February 2021 . . BBC News . 13 May 2021 . Retrieved 13 May 2021 . Iyengar, Rish (13 May 2021). . CNN . Retrieved 13 May 2021 . . Gizmodo . 22 July 2021 . Retrieved 22 July 2021 . Sigalos, MacKenzie (9 June 2021). . CNBC . Retrieved 15 June 2021 . Sigalos, MacKenzie (14 November 2021). . CNBC . Retrieved 15 November 2021 . ^ Renteria, Nelson; Wilson, Tom; Strohecker, Karin (9 June 2021). . Reuters . Retrieved 16 June 2021 . La Monica, Paul (19 October 2021). . CNN . Retrieved 22 October 2021 . Mccrank, John (22 October 2021). . Reuters . Retrieved 27 October 2021 . Liang, Annabelle (25 March 2022). . BBC . Retrieved 26 March 2022 . ^ . BBC . 25 April 2022 . Retrieved 27 April 2022 . Browne, Ryan (10 May 2022). . CNBC . Milmo, Dan (18 June 2022). . The Guardian . Retrieved 19 June 2022 . Yaffe-Bellany, David (13 June 2022). . The New York Times . Binder, Matt (1 May 2022). . Mashable . Retrieved 20 September 2022 . Dent, S. (2 May 2022). . Engadget . Retrieved 20 September 2022 . ^ Feuer, Alan (14 December 2013). . The New York Times . from the original on 1 July 2018 . Retrieved 1 July 2018 . (1976). . 2 Lord North Street, Westminster, London SWIP 3LB: The institute of economic affairs. . from the original on 11 January 2020 . Retrieved 10 September 2015 . {{ }} :  CS1 maint: location ( ) European Central Bank (2012). (PDF) . Frankfurt am Main: European Central Bank. . (PDF) from the original on 6 November 2012. ^ . The Economist . 30 August 2018. from the original on 4 September 2018 . Retrieved 4 September 2018 . Lack of adoption and loads of volatility mean that cryptocurrencies satisfy none of those criteria. ^ Krugman, Paul (29 January 2018). . The New York Times . from the original on 4 June 2018. ^ Tourianski, Julia (13 August 2014). . Archive.org . from the original on 23 March 2019 . Retrieved 1 July 2018 . ^ Dodd, Nigel (2017). (PDF) . LSE Research Online . (PDF) from the original on 1 July 2018 . Retrieved 1 July 2018 . Golumbia, David (2015).  Lovink, Geert (ed.). Bitcoin as Politics: Distributed Right-Wing Extremism . Institute of Network Cultures, Amsterdam. pp. 117–131. . . Peters, Jeremy W.; Popper, Nathaniel (14 June 2018). . The New York Times . from the original on 1 July 2018 . Retrieved 1 July 2018 . Matthew Graham Wilson & Aaron Yelowitz (November 2014). "Characteristics of Bitcoin Users: An Analysis of Google Search Data". Social Science Research Network . Working Papers Series. . ^ . The Economist . The Economist Newspaper Limited. 29 September 2012. from the original on 20 October 2013 . Retrieved 21 October 2013 . . . 13 January 2015. from the original on 12 January 2015 . Retrieved 13 January 2015 . ^ . The Economist . 15 March 2014. from the original on 25 March 2014 . Retrieved 25 March 2014 . ^ Shiller, Robert (1 March 2014). . The New York Times . from the original on 24 October 2014. . www.zdnet.com . Kharif, Olga (1 August 2018). . Bloomberg. from the original on 2 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 . ^ Murphy, Hannah (8 June 2018). . Financial Times . from the original on 10 June 2018 . Retrieved 10 June 2018 . Katz, Lily (12 July 2017). . Bloomberg. from the original on 25 January 2018 . Retrieved 25 January 2018 . Karkaria, Urvaksh (23 September 2014). . Atlanta Business Chronicle . from the original on 26 October 2014. Chan, Bernice (16 January 2015). . . from the original on 31 May 2019 . Retrieved 31 May 2019 . . The Guardian . Australian Associated Press. 10 April 2014. from the original on 23 February 2015 . Retrieved 23 February 2015 . Weir, Mike (1 December 2014). . bbc.com . BBC. from the original on 3 February 2015 . Retrieved 9 January 2015 . . Financial Review . 19 October 2015. from the original on 11 February 2016 . Retrieved 28 January 2016 . . CBS News . 11 December 2017. from the original on 31 May 2019 . Retrieved 31 May 2019 . . CBS News . 18 December 2017. from the original on 31 May 2019 . Retrieved 31 May 2019 . . Bloomberg . 26 September 2019. from the original on 26 September 2019 . Retrieved 26 September 2019 . Velde, François (December 2013). (PDF) . Chicago Fed letter . . p. 4. (PDF) from the original on 26 October 2014 . Retrieved 3 September 2016 . Wile, Rob (6 April 2014). . businessinsider.com . Business Insider. from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 16 April 2014 . Andolfatto, David (24 December 2013). . MacroMania . David Andolfatto. from the original on 12 April 2017 . Retrieved 17 April 2014 . Also, note that I am not against gold or bitcoin (or whatever) as a currency. In fact, I think that the threat that they pose as alternate currency can serve as a useful check on a central bank. Lee, Timothy B. . The Switch . The Washington Post. from the original on 6 July 2017 . Retrieved 11 August 2017 . . BBC News . 10 July 2014. from the original on 10 July 2014 . Retrieved 10 July 2014 . Hill, Kashmir. . Forbes . from the original on 19 February 2015 . Retrieved 16 February 2015 . Steverman, Ben (23 December 2014). . bloomberg.com . Bloomberg LP. from the original on 9 January 2015 . Retrieved 9 January 2015 . Gilbert, Mark (29 December 2015). . Bloomberg. from the original on 29 December 2015 . Retrieved 29 December 2015 . . bitinfocharts.com . from the original on 15 October 2017 . Retrieved 14 October 2017 . Simonite, Tom (12 June 2013). . Computing News . . Retrieved 13 June 2013 . ^ Robin Sidel (1 December 2014). . The Wall Street Journal . Dow Jones & Company . Retrieved 9 December 2014 . [ ] Alex Hern (1 July 2014). . The Guardian . from the original on 23 October 2014 . Retrieved 31 October 2014 . . Red Herring . 24 January 2014. from the original on 9 March 2014 . Retrieved 9 March 2014 . ^ Tasca, Paolo (7 September 2015), Digital Currencies: Principles, Trends, Opportunities, and Risks , Social Science Research Network, Moore, Heidi (3 April 2013). . The Guardian . from the original on 1 March 2014 . Retrieved 2 May 2014 . Lee, Timothy (5 November 2013). . The Washington Post . from the original on 11 January 2014 . Retrieved 10 January 2014 . Liu, Alec (19 March 2013). . Motherboard. from the original on 7 February 2014 . Retrieved 7 January 2014 . Ben Rooney (29 November 2013). . CNN. from the original on 26 October 2014 . Retrieved 31 October 2014 . . nasdaq.com. August 2014. from the original on 14 October 2014 . Retrieved 31 October 2014 . Williams, Mark T. (21 October 2014). (PDF) . World Bank Conference Washington DC . . (PDF) from the original on 11 November 2014 . Retrieved 11 November 2014 . Irrera, Tom Wilson, Anna (11 January 2021). . Reuters . from the original on 6 February 2021. Trading volumes across six major cryptocurrency exchanges have been 10% higher at weekends than weekdays in that period Zaki, Myret (14 January 2021). . The Market (in German). from the original on 15 January 2021. the lion's share of institutional trading in bitcoin is being done without owning any single bitcoin. The bitcoin derivative boom was encouraged by the fact that you can get 2 to 3 times leverage on the CME, and more than 100 x leverage on native crypto derivative exchanges. In 2020, the ratio between bitcoin futures and spot volumes has increased from 2,3 to 4,6 in 2019 . cftc.gov . (CFTC). 2–5 February 2021. from the original on 8 February 2021. Bitcoin – Chicago Mercantile Exchange, CFTC Code #133741 . Retrieved 8 February 2021 . . . 18 September 2017. from the original on 3 October 2017 . Retrieved 6 October 2017 . The decentralized nature of bitcoin is such that it is impossible to "ban" the cryptocurrency, but if you shut down exchanges and the peer-to-peer economy running on bitcoin, it's a de facto ban. (PDF) . Library of Congress . The Law Library of Congress, Global Legal Research Center. June 2018. pp. 4–5. (PDF) from the original on 14 August 2018 . Retrieved 15 August 2018 . Clinch, Matt (22 October 2015). . CNBC . Retrieved 16 August 2022 . . . U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission . from the original on 1 July 2018 . Retrieved 17 July 2018 . (PDF) . U.S.Commodity Futures Trading Commission . (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2018 . Retrieved 17 July 2018 . . Investor.gov . . 7 May 2014. from the original on 30 June 2018 . Retrieved 17 July 2018 . (PDF) . sec.gov . . (PDF) from the original on 16 June 2018 . Retrieved 17 July 2018 . (PDF) . European Banking Authority. 12 December 2013. Archived from (PDF) on 28 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 . . FINRA.org . Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. 21 December 2017. from the original on 1 July 2018 . Retrieved 23 July 2018 . . North American Securities Administrators Association. April 2018. from the original on 23 July 2018 . Retrieved 23 July 2018 . Dean, James (25 May 2018). . . from the original on 25 May 2018 . Retrieved 25 May 2018 . Cornish, Chloe (24 May 2018). . Financial Times . from the original on 24 May 2018 . Retrieved 24 May 2018 . Robinson, Matt; Schoenberg, Tom (24 May 2018). . Bloomberg. from the original on 24 May 2018 . Retrieved 24 May 2018 . McCoy, Kevin (24 May 2018). . . from the original on 24 May 2018 . Retrieved 25 May 2018 . Rubin, Gabriel T.; Michaels, Dave; Osipovich, Alexander (8 June 2018). . MarketWatch . from the original on 8 June 2018 . Retrieved 9 June 2018 . Note:this is a short open access version of a Wall Street Journal article Rubin, Gabriel T.; Michaels, Dave; Osipovich, Alexander (8 June 2018). . The Wall Street Journal . from the original on 8 June 2018 . Retrieved 9 June 2018 . (paywalled) Fung, Brian (21 May 2018). . The Washington Post . from the original on 27 May 2018 . Retrieved 27 May 2018 . Gandal, Neil; Hamrick, J.T.; Moore, Tyler; Oberman, Tali (May 2018). "Price manipulation in the Bitcoin ecosystem". . : 86–96. : . . Lee, Tim (12 December 2017). . Ars Technica . from the original on 28 May 2018 . Retrieved 27 May 2018 . Griffin, John M.; Shams, Amin (13 June 2018). "Is Bitcoin Really Un-Tethered?". Social Science Research Network . . Popper, Nathaniel (13 June 2018). . The New York Times . from the original on 13 June 2018 . Retrieved 13 June 2018 . Shaban, Hamza (14 June 2018). . The Washington Post . from the original on 15 June 2018 . Retrieved 14 June 2018 . Aleman, Marcos (9 June 2021). . Associated Press . Retrieved 16 June 2021 . . Agencia EFE (in Spanish). 9 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2021 . . Agence France Presse . 9 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2021 . ^ Ostroff, Caitlin (9 June 2021). . . Retrieved 9 June 2021 . Webber, Jude; Szalay, Eva (9 June 2021). . . Retrieved 16 June 2021 . Portillo, Denni (11 June 2021). . La Prensa Gráfica . Retrieved 6 July 2021 . Magaña, Yolanda (11 June 2021). . El Mundo (El Salvador) . Retrieved 6 July 2021 . Jagtiani, Sunil (9 June 2021). . Bloomberg . Retrieved 9 June 2021 . . www.asamblea.gob.sv . Retrieved 26 January 2022 . Lopez, Oscar; Livni, Ephrat (7 September 2021). . The New York Times . Archived from on 28 December 2021 . Retrieved 30 September 2021 . Renteria, Nelson (25 June 2021). . Reuters . Retrieved 25 June 2021 . Silver, Katie (8 September 2021). . BBC . . Noticias de El Salvador – La Prensa Gráfica | Informate con la verdad (in Spanish). 5 November 2021 . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . Tidy, Joe (7 September 2021). . BBC . More than 68% of those questioned said they disagreed with using cryptocurrency as a legal tender. . Reuters . 2 September 2021 . Retrieved 30 November 2021 . Urquilla, EFE- K. (22 November 2021). . Noticias de El Salvador — elsalvador.com (in Spanish) . Retrieved 11 December 2021 . Kurmanaev, Anatoly (7 October 2021). . The New York Times . Archived from on 7 October 2021 . Retrieved 8 October 2021 . (in European Spanish). . 15 January 2022 . Retrieved 15 January 2022 . (PDF) . uca.edu.sv . Retrieved 15 January 2022 . , pp. 34-37 . BBC News . 26 January 2022. Alvarez, Fernando; Argente, David; Van Patten, Diana (2022). Are Cryptocurrencies Currencies? Bitcoin as Legal Tender in El Salvador (Report). Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. : . Ishmael, Stacy-Marie; Miller, Hannah (26 February 2022). . Bloomberg . Retrieved 5 April 2022 . . www.unian.net . . . 27 February 2022. . . 27 February 2022. Kharif, Olga (5 March 2022). . Time . Bloomberg. . . 17 March 2022. . www.unian.net . . ^ . aawsat.com . 31 October 2020 . Retrieved 1 November 2020 . . vice.com . 3 November 2020 . Retrieved 10 November 2020 . . foreignpolicy.com . 24 January 2020 . Retrieved 10 November 2020 . . The Denver Post . 21 September 2022 . Retrieved 19 January 2023 . . Canton of Zug. 3 September 2020 . Retrieved 24 January 2021 . (in German). Schweizerischen Radio- und Fernsehgesellschaft. 3 September 2020 . Retrieved 24 January 2021 . Costelloe, Kevin (29 November 2017). . Bloomberg. from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 5 June 2018 . It doesn't serve any socially useful function. . ECO Portuguese Economy. 22 January 2018. from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 7 June 2018 . . . 2 February 2018. from the original on 12 June 2018. Braue, David (11 March 2014). . ZDNet . from the original on 6 October 2016 . Retrieved 5 October 2016 . Clinch, Matt (10 March 2014). . . from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 2 July 2014 . . . from the original on 24 September 2017 . Retrieved 23 September 2017 . Ott Ummelas & Milda Seputyte (31 January 2014). . bloomberg.com . Bloomberg. from the original on 29 March 2014 . Retrieved 1 April 2014 . (11 April 2013). . Slate . from the original on 26 March 2014 . Retrieved 1 April 2014 . Kaushik Basu (July 2014). (PDF) . . (PDF) from the original on 31 October 2014 . Retrieved 30 October 2014 . (PDF) . . . 25 June 2014. (PDF) from the original on 5 December 2014 . Retrieved 28 November 2014 . Vigna, Paul (20 December 2021). . . . Lavin, Tim (8 August 2013). . bloomberg.com . Bloomberg LP. from the original on 25 March 2014 . Retrieved 20 October 2013 . Ball, James (22 March 2013). . theguardian.com . Guardian News and Media Limited. from the original on 12 October 2013 . Retrieved 20 October 2013 . Montag, Ali (9 July 2018). . CNBC. from the original on 11 July 2018 . Retrieved 11 July 2018 . Newlands, Chris (9 July 2018). . . from the original on 11 July 2018 . Retrieved 11 July 2018 . ^ Badea, Liana; Mungiu-Pupӑzan, Mariana Claudia (2021). . IEEE Access . : 48091–48104. : . . . ^ Huang, Jon; O'Neill, Claire; Tabuchi, Hiroko (3 September 2021). . The New York Times . . Retrieved 16 January 2022 . . Cambridge Judge Business School . 27 September 2022 . Retrieved 28 October 2022 . Rudgard, Olivia (24 April 2022). . The Telegraph . Retrieved 28 October 2022 . . . 29 July 2022. . Retrieved 11 October 2022 – via Time.com. . Wall Street Journal . 28 September 2021 . Retrieved 28 October 2022 . . Financial Times . 20 May 2021 . Retrieved 6 April 2023 . . ccaf.io . Retrieved 2 October 2022 . . . 12 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 February 2021 . requires nearly as much energy as the entire country of Argentina Foteinis, Spyros (2018). . Nature . (7691): 169. : . : . Krause, Max J.; Tolaymat, Thabet (2018). "Quantification of energy and carbon costs for mining cryptocurrencies". Nature Sustainability . (11): 711–718. : . . Mora, Camilo;  et al. (2018). "Bitcoin emissions alone could push global warming above 2°C". Nature Climate Change . (11): 931–933. : . : . . Stoll, Christian; Klaaßen, Lena; Gallersdörfer, Ulrich (2019). . Joule . (7): 1647–1661. : . Calma, Justine (29 September 2022). . The Verge . Retrieved 30 September 2022 . McGinn, Miyo (29 September 2022). . Popular Science . Retrieved 30 September 2022 . Jones, Benjamin A.; Goodkind, Andrew L.; Berrens, Robert P. (29 September 2022). . Scientific Reports . (1): 14512. : . . . . de Vries, Alex; Stoll, Christian (1 December 2021). . Resources, Conservation and Recycling . : 105901. : . . . . BBC News . 20 September 2021 . Retrieved 27 February 2022 . . Digiconomist . Retrieved 27 February 2022 . . The Guardian . 17 September 2021 . Retrieved 27 February 2022 . AP (21 April 2022). . www.business-standard.com . Retrieved 11 October 2022 . Frost, Rosie (3 November 2021). . euronews . Retrieved 11 October 2022 . Gschossmann, Isabella; van der Kraaij, Anton; Benoit, Pierre-Loïc; Rocher., Emmanuel (11 July 2022). . Macroprudential Bulletin . (18). Hiar, Corbin (10 March 2022). . . Retrieved 27 October 2022 . Antonopoulos, Andreas (2017). "3". Mastering Bitcoin: Programming the Open Blockchain (2nd ed.). O'Reilly Media. . Bitcoin Core is the reference implementation of the bitcoin system, meaning that it is the authoritative reference on how each part of the technology should be implemented. Bitcoin Core implements all aspects of bitcoin, including wallets, a transaction and block validation engine, and a full network node in the peer-to-peer bitcoin network. . Bitcoin Core . 19 March 2014 . Retrieved 21 October 2018 . ^ Antonopoulos, Andreas M. (2014). . O'Reilly Media, Inc. pp. 31–32. . Retrieved 6 November 2016 . . Inc . 29 March 2016 . Retrieved 21 October 2018 . ^ . Bitcoin Core . Retrieved 21 October 2018 . . Bitcoin . Retrieved 21 October 2018 . . Repository source code . GitHub, Inc . Retrieved 13 November 2016 . . GitHub . Retrieved 21 October 2018 . Mike Orcutt (19 May 2015). . MIT Technology Review . Retrieved 15 November 2016 . . Bitcoin Project. 1 November 2016 . Retrieved 16 November 2016 . Antonopoulos, Andreas (29 May 2013). . Radar . O'Reilly . Retrieved 19 November 2016 . . GitHub . Retrieved 5 May 2018 . ^ Preukschat, Alex; Josep Busquet (2015). . Europe Comics. p. 87. . Retrieved 16 November 2016 . Maria Bustillos (25 August 2015). . New Yorker . Retrieved 29 June 2020 . Kaminska, Izabella (22 December 2017). . Financial Times . Retrieved 21 November 2018 . Montag, Ali (26 August 2018). . CNBC . Retrieved 12 November 2020 . Wong, Joon Ian. . Quartz . from the original on 22 December 2017 . Retrieved 22 December 2017 . Akhtar, Tanzeel (22 December 2017). . TheStreet . from the original on 23 December 2017 . Retrieved 22 December 2017 . Hajric, Vildana (19 November 2020). . Bloomberg . Retrieved 1 December 2020 . Stross, Charles (2013). (First ed.). New York: Penguin Group USA. . It's theft-proof too – for each bitcoin is cryptographically signed by the mind of its owner. . www.antipope.org . from the original on 14 June 2017 . Retrieved 5 December 2017 . I wrote Neptune's Brood in 2011. Bitcoin was obscure back then, and I figured had just enough name recognition to be a useful term for an interstellar currency: it'd clue people in that it was a networked digital currency. Kenigsberg, Ben (2 October 2014). . The New York Times . from the original on 18 May 2015 . Retrieved 8 May 2015 . Michel, Lincoln (16 December 2017). . GQ . from the original on 18 November 2018 . Retrieved 10 October 2018 . . Motherboard . from the original on 10 January 2017. . ledgerjournal.org . from the original on 23 December 2016 . Retrieved 10 January 2017 . (PDF) . . 2015. : (inactive 31 December 2022). (PDF) from the original on 22 September 2015. {{ }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of December 2022 ( ) External links Media related to at Wikimedia Commons at People Lists Technologies Client Currency History Movies (2014 film) (2015 film) Legal entities (not exchanges) Technology mechanisms currencies -based -based (1.0) -based -based RandomX-based -based Other currencies (2.0) tokens Other currencies Defunct Crypto service companies Related topics Generic placeholder International National Other Retrieved from " " : Hidden categories: This page was last edited on 11 April 2023, at 06:23 (UTC) . Text is available under the ;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the and . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the , a non-profit organization.